In Java, Garbage Collection (GC) is a memory management process that automatically reclaims memory by
deleting objects that are no longer reachable or in use by the application. It ensures that the heap
space is efficiently utilized, minimizing the risks of memory leaks and optimizing application performance.

1. What is Garbage Collection?
Garbage Collection is the process of identifying and discarding unused objects to free up memory,
allowing new objects to utilize the reclaimed space. This process is automatic in Java, unlike in
languages like C or C++, where memory allocation and deallocation must be handled manually.

2. The Heap and Object Lifecycle
Java objects are stored in the heap, which is divided into:

Young Generation
Eden Space: New objects are created here.
Survivor Spaces (S0 and S1): Objects that survive garbage collection in the Eden space are moved here.
Old Generation (Tenured Generation): Long-lived objects are moved here after surviving multiple
garbage collections.
Metaspace: Stores class metadata and is separate from the heap.

3. How Does Garbage Collection Work?
Phases of Garbage Collection
Mark Phase:
The GC identifies all live (reachable) objects. It does so by traversing the "roots"
(references from thread stacks, static fields, etc.) and marking objects that are reachable.
Sweep Phase:
Unreachable objects are identified and their memory is reclaimed.
Compact Phase (optional):
The heap is defragmented by moving objects to contiguous memory locations to avoid fragmentation.
Root Sources for GC Marking:
Local variables in stack frames
Static variables in classes
Active threads

4. Types of Garbage Collectors in Java
4.1 Serial Garbage Collector
Single-threaded and works best for applications with a single CPU.
Suitable for simple desktop applications or single-threaded environments.
4.2 Parallel Garbage Collector
Uses multiple threads for both minor and major garbage collection.
Suitable for applications that run on multi-threaded environments and prioritize throughput.
4.3 Concurrent Mark-Sweep (CMS) Garbage Collector
Focuses on reducing GC pauses by performing most of the GC work concurrently with the application threads.
Divided into initial mark, concurrent mark, remark, and concurrent sweep phases.
Deprecated in Java 9 and replaced by the G1 GC.
4.4 G1 Garbage Collector (Garbage First)
Divides the heap into equal-sized regions and collects regions with the most garbage first.
Performs incremental compaction, making it more efficient for large heaps and low-latency applications.
4.5 Z Garbage Collector (ZGC)
Ultra-low latency collector that performs most GC tasks concurrently.
Scalable for heaps ranging from a few megabytes to terabytes.
4.6 Shenandoah Garbage Collector
Focuses on low-pause times by compacting memory concurrently.
Available from JDK 12 and onwards.

6. Common Garbage Collection Algorithms
6.1 Stop-the-World (STW)
During certain GC phases, all application threads are paused to prevent modification of objects
while the GC is working.
6.2 Copying Collection
Used in the young generation. It copies live objects to a survivor space, leaving behind unused
objects for reclamation.
6.3 Mark-Sweep-Compact
Mark: Identifies live objects.
Sweep: Reclaims memory from dead objects.
Compact: Reduces fragmentation by moving live objects together.

7. JVM Tuning and Garbage Collector Selection
You can customize garbage collection behavior using JVM options:

Serial GC: -XX:+UseSerialGC
Parallel GC: -XX:+UseParallelGC
G1 GC: -XX:+UseG1GC
ZGC: -XX:+UseZGC
Shenandoah: -XX:+UseShenandoahGC
Heap size configurations:

-Xms (initial heap size)
-Xmx (maximum heap size)

9. Best Practices for Effective GC
Optimize Object Creation:
Avoid creating unnecessary objects.
Reuse objects when possible.
Reduce Object References:
Nullify references to large objects when no longer needed.
Use Appropriate Data Structures:
Choose efficient collections (e.g., ArrayList over LinkedList for most scenarios).
Tune JVM Settings:
Tailor GC algorithms and heap sizes for specific application needs.

10. Common Challenges
Long GC Pauses:
Occurs during "stop-the-world" events.
Mitigated using concurrent or low-latency collectors like G1, ZGC, or Shenandoah.
OutOfMemoryError:
Happens if GC cannot reclaim enough memory or heap space is exhausted.
Heap Fragmentation:
Compaction in the GC helps reduce this issue.

Example: Forcing Garbage Collection
You can explicitly request garbage collection using:
System.gc();
Runtime.getRuntime().gc();
Note: This is a suggestion to the JVM and not guaranteed to trigger GC immediately.